# A Better Information Course Catalog for MIMS

## Summary

For this Info 202 implementation project, I decided to add a categorization structure for all Information graduate courses offered during the 2024-2025 and 2025-2026 academic years, aimed at assisting MIMS students in their course search. The current Information catalog doesn't have a meaningful organizational scheme beyond separating courses into undergraduate, graduate, and professional levels, so I implemented a new one by creating a set of faceted metadata containing all relevant course information. The metadata for each course includes details such as the course unit count, description, and past and future timeslots, all displayed simultaneously to create as informative of an interface as possible without the user having to navigate to different webpages, as they would with the official catalog. This new category architecture enables filtering of the course catalog, helping the user find specific courses that fulfill a MIMS degree requirement, are applicable towards the Applied Data Science graduate certificate, or pertain to various topics. All components were built in React to create an online interactive webpage to house the catalog and its categorization scheme.

## Process

### Creating Faceted Metadata

Since I wanted users of this new site to be able to filter on three major course traits, my first goal was to determine which categories each course should be placed into. I began by storing all course details from the Information catalogs for 2024 - 2025 and 2025 - 2026 in a JSON file, as we did in the website building assignment, to provide the course data for the React webpage application. Each course was represented by faceted metadata stored in a JSON object, with the following keys: an index to uniquely identify the course, the course ID, title, unit count, instructor, description, semester offered, timeslot, location, course type (core or non-core for the MIMS degree), the MIMS degree requirement fulfilled if any, applicability towards the Applied Data Science certificate, topics covered, and any additional information. Some facets could be multi-valued, in the event that the course was offered during multiple semesters and therefore had multiple possible instructors or timeslots; these were permitted to be stored as arrays when necessary.

The MIMS degree requirement was one of the three major course traits to be used as a filter. Consequently, it produced a shallow hierarchy, in that all courses could only be placed into a single exclusive and non-overlapping category -- they either did not fulfill any requirements, or fulfilled either the Technology requirement or the Social Science and Policy requirement. Eligibility towards the Applied Data Science certificate was another course trait to be used as a filter, and similarly formed a hierarchy where courses either were not applicable towards the certificate, or counted as an introductory data science course, an analytical methods and techniques of data science course, or an elective. For the final filtering trait, I created a new multi-valued facet to describe the topics covered by the course, providing a pseudo-keyword search for terms such as "programming" or "artificial intelligence." Adding these topics was an exercise in creating new categories based solely on the course description, while also ensuring that they were broad enough to apply to multiple courses since I wanted every single course to be assigned at least one topic. The rest of the facets were purely informational, in that they weren't used in the filtering functionality and merely provided additional details about the course that might be helpful to a MIMS student.

This faceted metadata structure helped me thoroughly describe the course collection for both informative and filtering purposes. The MIMS degree requirement, certificate eligibility, and topic facets formed a system of overlapping but equally-important categories for this collection (similarly to what we accomplished with the Algolia interface), rather than a singular hierarchical taxonomy that would have required a very rigid and complex ruleset to eventually divide all courses into their own unique categories. Additionally, these three facets acted as a way to parse a user's inherent search query into a combination of Boolean operations -- for example, a MIMS student searching for courses that are eligible for the Applied Data Science certificate and pertain to machine learning or data science would use the filters to produce the following conjunct of disjuncts: (MIMS degree requirement = null OR MIMS degree requirement = Technology OR MIMS degree requirement = Social Science and Policy) AND (DS certification = Introductory DS course OR DS certification = Applied Methods and Techniques of DS course OR DS certification = elective) AND (topic = machine learning OR topic = data science).

### Building the Catalog Webpage

I utilized my learnings from Info 253A to build a website structure and enable both filtering and editing interactivity for the catalog. Each component of the app embodies a unique function, per standard React guidelines. The webpage is laid out with a "main content" section containing all course catalog data, and a sidebar on the right side that contains all filters that can be applied by the user. Above the catalog is a "breadcrumbs" section, reflecting all of the user's current filters in a condensed location; the user can click on a breadcrumb to remove the corresponding filter as well. There is also a form at the bottom of the page where users can provide details for a new course to add to the catalog, and each course item contains another form-based component that the user can activate to edit the course details in-place. Additions to the catalog and alterations to specific courses are both saved in localStorage so that the updated catalog is persisted indefinitely for the user, even when the browser is refreshed or closed. Additionally, when I implemented responsive design, I added a navigation bar at the top of the page and made the filter sidebar visible only by clicking on the menu in the navbar, maintaining a visually clean and accessible user interface. 

# INSERT FILE STRUCTURE HERE? 

The catalog data in the JSON file and the active MIMS degree requirement, Applied Data Science certificate course type, and topics filters are stored in state data within the App component to help manage interactivity with various other components as needed. When it came to handling and displaying data for courses offered across multiple semesters, I consolidated all relevant semester, timeslot, and location data into the timeslots section for each course rather than creating a duplicate course item for each semester, which helped me keep the catalog concise. I also ordered the timeslots from most to least recent to keep the most up-to-date information easily visually accessible for users.

Additionally, I created a few small quality-of-life features to improve the user experience. The first was the "Add a New Course" hyperlink in the header section of the webpage, which scrolls down to the form where the user can add a course to the catalog. The second is the "page up" icon fixed in the top right corner of the page; clicking this will take the user to the top of the page. Both of these features are meant to improve the user's navigability through the catalog, as the full catalog is fairly long at over 50 courses. Finally, I utilized the useEffect hook to scroll directly to a course if the user edits it or adds it to the catalog, since the viewport often did not stay anchored to the original course entry after the form editing component was unmounted. 

#### Attribution and Acknowledgements:

No AI, generative or otherwise, was used during the completion of this project and writeup. I did consult my previous work on Info 253A's curriculum as well as assignment/lab examples as provided by professor Kay Ashaolu, specifically Assignment 2 for general React guidance and Lab 2 for the clickable hamburger toggle/menu (responsive styling) code. 